## Sitting on the shoulders of Giants - How GitHub support talent aquisition 

For making connections with similar minded people, for building a community for mutual benefit and promotion, learning, or just for making friends for sharing stories and experiences are some of the reasons business people spend time with social networking sites such as Linkedin. Recruiting is another activity conducted in these networks. In this week|s post, we look at GitHub, the programming platform, as one of the essential tools in attracting people in a high tech start up.

In 2018 interview with Ory|s Thomas Curran (https://www.tagesspiegel.de/wirtschaft/programmierer-plattform-github-im-zeichen-der-krakenkatze/23208580.html) , the German journalist Oliver Vos, writing for Der Tagesspiegel, describes GitHub as „Facebook für Programmierer“ with 31 Millionen members. Fast forward to 2021, and the GitHub network is now the largest magnet on earth for technical talent. 

The Vikings often brought ravens on voyages to help them locate land and food. In fact, the famous ravens, Huginn and Muninn, are often depicted sitting on the shoulders of the Viking God named Odin. The birds were sort of the "eyes and ears" that brought information to Odin, and they kept a history too. With enough risks to deal with daily, every high tech entreprener needs some extra eyes and ears to discover more about the competitive environment, especially for talent. 

### GitHub is a motor for the global software community

In September 2020, GitHub had roughly fifty six million members. 35 of the Fortune 50 companies use GitHub Enterprise, a special version of the GitHub platform designed around the needs of large global enterprises, to support software product development. Finally with 60 million new repositories and over 1.9 billion individual contributions, GitHub functions as the heart of the global software supply chain. And GitHub is an indispensable tool for budding high tech entrepreneurs

### Ory builds Open Source products using GitHub

Ory is committed to Open Source. Open Source Software is not a fad, its an artisan creation model that has and will shape an entire generation of applications in the cloud.  Ory has an active community of contributors in GitHub at www.github.com/ory, and, as most other popular projects, the main repositories carry a simple three word message “we are hiring.” As an Open Source, and open and inclusive company Ory seeks to attract people from all walks of life. We look carefully at every applicant”s background on Github. It shows the software projects, network, and activities. More than any specific interview question, GitHub indicates what technologies are used, and how the developer has advanced in skills over the years. We even use GitHub to manage our interview questions.

Receprosity in crucial in relationships, and Ory wants potential team memebers to also see what Ory does in detail. Often they open Github issues with questions about a project or a specific programming problem. “Pull Requests” are the vehicle for making contributions, and the best developers take pride in finding ways to impress a potential employer. Developers can also see how Ory has progressed over the years. For instance see the following diagram showing GitHub Stars, equivalent to “likes” in Facebook.

### Advancing the industry and the state of Open Source Software

This type of information is important for both the developer and for Ory. One of the reasons Microsoft paid 7.5 million US dollars in 2018 for GitHub has to do with the broad community and the data it created since GitHub's beginning in 2008 (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/github). With Microsoft's support for the Github platform and community, the giant from Redmond has advanced the state of software development like no other company in history. And that support helps Microsoft grow,  but it also high tech startups locate talented developers that will use Microsoft products such as Azure in the future. As the renowned mathematician Isaac Newton once said "If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of Giants." Similar to Odin’s ravens, smart entrepreneurs look for every advantage to find talent, and GitHub is the giant with broad shoulders.
